---
layout: post
title:  "SaaS Metrics for Growth Equity Interviews"
date:   2018-08-05
excerpt: "A primer on various SaaS metrics to know that came up in my interviews for growth equity firms during my undergrad years."
image: "/images/dcf.png"
---

## Background:
Software investment firms tend to value certain metrics specifically more than others and here are a few that came up a lot in my VC/PE interviews during undergrad. It's good to have a solid understanding of not only these metrics themselves, but also how they actually affect the health of a company holistically. Similarly, these are also indicators of how a company will continue to do in the future so it is good to understand how each of these elements are changing over time for a given company and what they may signal. 

This post will generally assume companies are SaaS businesses. SaaS stands for "Software as a Service" and customers pay on a monthly or annual basis for access to the software. Additionally, customers have the option of renewing, upgrading, or downgrading their subscription throughout their subscription. This contrasts with businesses that have a perpetual license business model, meaning that customers pay upfront for a perpetual license that they can use in perpetuity. Discussing the pros and cons of each model (as well as all the various other models in existence) will have to be another post, but here's the quick rundown: SaaS provides less revenue to the selling company upfront, but more consistent revenue, since the upfront fee is much smaller in the SaaS model but customers pay regularly. However, because it is recurring, customers generally also have the option of cancelling their subscription at any time. From the other point of view, customers may prefer SaaS since the initial costs are much lower and have the ability to cancel their subscription at any time, but they will lose complete access to the software if they cancel. This isn't the case in the perpetual license model where, as the name suggests, they can continue using the software even after cancelling. They may lose access to future updates and current maintenance, but they will at least keep what they paid for.

Let’s move onto the metrics. There is an explanation for each metric and an example of what that metric may look like at a good company and at a great company. It’s important to remember though that these metrics should be taken into consideration with all the others in mind. Hopefully you find these helpful!

## Metrics:

### Revenue
Revenue, often referred to as "top line" (because revenue is the uppermost line in a balance sheet), is simply how much in cash a company brings in in a specific time period. Typically expressed in annual terms, you might see it noted something like "2017a", meaning the actual revenue seen in 2017. Conversely, "2018e" means the estimated revenue a company believes they will bring in that year. It is worth noting that a company’s 2018e revenue figure should be taken with a grain of salt if presented in Jan ’18, whereas a 2018e figure presented in Nov ’18 is probably going to be fairly close to actual revenue for that year.

A good business at scale will have top line growth greater than 10% annually. A great business will be growing at over 30% annually. 

### ARR/MRR
ARR stands for "annual recurring revenue" and it represents the total value of all the contracts at a given time, annualized. It's an indicator of a company's financial position at that specific point in time. For example, if you have 30 customers that all pay $10/month, your ARR is 30 customers x $10/month x 12 months = $3,600. Why can a company's ARR be different than their annual revenue? Customers can sign up for the subscription at different times throughout the year. Returning to the same previous example, if all your 30 customers signed up halfway through the year, the ARR at that point in time will be the same $3,600, but your actual recognized revenue for that year will only be half that since they will only have paid for 6 months by the end of the year (assuming no new customers sign up in the same period). MRR is the same thing, but on a monthly basis. If you just multiply MRR by 12, you get ARR.

### Bookings v ACV, v TCV
This is a metric that is important to dissect and clarify, especially when given these figures in an interview (or real call with an entrepreneur). Bookings can be multi-year contracts, meaning that if a company had $3M in bookings in a given year, but the average contract was a 3-year contract, that means that the company will actually only recognize only $1M of that booking a year as revenue. Similarly, TCV stands for “total contract value” and represents what the average dollar amount of contracts are. Divide average TCV by average contract length, and you arrive at average ACV, or “annual contract value”. 

### Churn (Retention), gross v net
This is will be a longer metric section, because there are many ways to interpret churn and some can be misleading. This definitely came up in interviews and it’s important to really understand all the differences. 

Churn generally is how many customers are cancelling or downgrading their subscription in a given year. Higher churn implies that customers do not enjoy the product and are leaving, either for a cheaper competitor or a better competitor. Retention is generally just the opposite, i.e. how many customers stay per year. However, it is still possible for a company to have a very good retention rate (low churn) because the product is so vital to a company’s operation and switching would be a cost-prohibitive option or a very time-consuming option. From an investment standpoint, this is a very good thing and we generally refer to this as “stickiness”. A very sticky product might be a terrible product that is a pain to use, but once a company switches to this product, they might never switch back.

For a given churn/retention figure, there are always a few clarifying questions to ask. Is this logo or revenue churn? And is this gross or net retention? 

The difference between logo and revenue churn is subtle but still important. Logo churn refers to the number of customers that are churning, while revenue churn refers to the actual dollar-amount of those customers leaving. This means that if a company has high revenue churn, but low logo churn, that means that the customers that are churning are generally larger (and thus higher-paying) customers. This is much more concerning than if the opposite scenario were true. The opposite would imply the company is only churning small customers and this is less concerning because smaller customers tend to have higher churn rates anyway. Intuitively, if a customer only had to switch two of their employees to a new piece of software, it’s fairly easy. However, in a large corporation where switching softwares might mean having to retrain 5,000 employees, the cost of switching is obviously much higher.

Second, gross retention versus net retention. Gross retention only represents how many customers have cancelled their subscriptions versus how many kept theirs. Net retention is gross retention, but with the addition of customer upsells, i.e. includes how much existing customers upgraded to a higher tier (and higher cost) subscription in a year. Gross retention will always be under 100%, but given that net retention includes upsells, it is possible to have a net retention of >100%.

As I alluded to earlier, SMB customers (small and medium business) tend to have higher churn values generally. If the company that you’re looking at is focused at selling to SMB customers, then it’s important to know the numbers will be lower than an enterprise-focused company. An SMB-focused company that has a gross revenue retention rate >80% is a good business, and one with >90% is a great business. For an enterprise-focused company, generally >90% and 95%, respectively, are good guidelines.  

### Margins
Margins honestly should be at the top since it’s a very simple metric, but I kept it down here because it’s more relevant to the next few metrics. Gross margin is simply gross profit / revenue. It’s basically asking for all the products I sell, what portion of that money do I actually get to keep once I remove how much those products costed me to make, i.e. COGS (cost of goods sold). Good software companies generally have a gross margin of around 70% while consumer or hardware companies will have lower gross margins. There is a notable exception in physical good companies, luxury goods. Luxury goods can sometimes reach 70% gross margins or higher.

### LTV
LTV stands for “lifetime value” and represents how much the average customer will spend with your company before they churn. This is just a simple calculation of:

Gross margin * ( revenue churn / ( 1 - revenue churn) )

### CAC
CAC stands for “customer acquisition cost”, representing how much it costs to sign up each additional customer. This includes the cost of marketing, sales, one-time onboarding costs, sales commissions, etc. 

These next two calculations are pulled from Updata Partner’s white sheet detailing what they consider a good and great software business. Please check out the links at the bottom to see their full reports, which includes a downloadable spreadsheet you can interact with.

### GMPP
Once you have gross margin, LTV, and CAC, you can calculate GMPP (gross margin payback period). GMPP simply represents how long it takes for a new customer to pay off how much it costed to acquire them in the first place. A software business with a GMPP under 18 months is good and under 12 months is great.

### rCAC
By calculating LTV and CAC, you can now see how much more or less (hopefully the former!) a customer will provide to the company over how much it cost to acquire them as a customer. A company that has an rCAC of over 3x is a good business and one with over 5x is a fantastic business. You can calculate rCAC through the following.

rCAC = LTV / CAC

### Rule of 40 
The Rule of 40 is a very simple metric to quickly evaluate the health of a SaaS company. If a company’s top line revenue growth rate + their profit margin is greater than 40, the company is a healthy business. For example, a business is growing 20% YoY and has a EBITDA margin of 25%, 20 + 25 = 50. It passes.

### Other things to take into consideration:
* Enterprise v SMB
* Sales Cycles

These will have to be another post one day. 

## Helpful Links:
Here are various links that helped me over the years and I pulled a lot of information from. 
* [A16Z: "16 Startup Metrics"](https://a16z.com/2015/08/21/16-metrics/)
* [A16Z: "16 More Startup Metrics"](https://a16z.com/2015/09/23/16-more-metrics/) 
* [FeldThoughts: "The Rule of 40% For a Healthy SaaS Company"](https://feld.com/archives/2015/02/rule-40-healthy-saas-company.html)
* [Updata Partners: "SaaS Metrics Framework"](https://updata.com/insights/saas-metrics-framework/)
* [Updata Partners: "SaaS Metrics: A Closer Look"](https://updata.com/insights/saas-metrics-a-closer-look-at-churn/)